As a final kinda capstone
to intermediate TypeScript,
we're going to do a little bit
of a practical exercise and
that is to make a well typed data layer or
a data store using
the concepts that we've
learned in the class today.
So, and I'm just in the playground here,
and you could copy this code if you like.
But all I've got is three classes,
one is called book,
one is called movie, one's called song.
And I've just chosen a different
meaningful property,
which we'll turn into a class field for
each of these different classes.
So if we did b is new book, we'd have to
give it an author, maybe I'm the author.
And we can see that b.authored
it gives us this type back, and
that's because we're using these nice
little shorthand param properties,
maybe you heard us talk about
this in TypeScript fundamentals.
So, ultimately, what I want is
an API that looks kind of like this.
I wanna be able to create a new store,
this is like a data store,
that's what I mean by store.
And then I wanna be able
to do something like
store.get('book'), and
this should return a book.
And I wanna be able to do getAll, and
this should return an array of books.
And maybe create and
this should take an arb if it's a book.
Hopefully we get the idea here.
We want a kind of a nice little crud,
some portion of a crud like
data store that gives me some good
types when I retrieve things,
and it gives me some type safety
when I'm trying to work with things,
trying to modify them.
So let's actually, I created a book here,
Let's pass that in, let's use this as
kind of a little test case, right?
And let's see if we can do this one,
we'll say update, and
this is gonna be kind of a patch,
where I'm gonna pass some
incomplete subset of fields here,
maybe I'm just editing the title or
something, call it a partial.
So this would be a book ID.
And then, Something like that.
So we want create and update and
then get a collection,
and we want good type safety around this.
And none of this works yet, so
we're gonna have to make it work.
So, clearly, we're gonna need
these methods here, right?
The getAll, create, and update.
So now the methods exist but
they don't take anything,
they don't take the right types of things.
And they all return void right now,
so we need to do some work.
Now I do notice that we've got book,
book, book, book,
we're referring to kind
of a record type by name.
So what I'm gonna do here is
create a map of my records, and
by map I just made a type that
gives me keys and values.
We'll call this EntityMap, since we've
talked about the word record before in
a different context, and
I don't want to overload it.
Great, so we've got movie, book, and song.
The keys are the names I'm gonna use
to refer to this kind of entity,
and then these are the follow
on classes and, sorry,
they will be interfaces,
because they're in the type position.
I mean, we're defining them as classes but
they will be the interface part of it,
meaning the type of
an instance of these classes.
So in all of these methods here,
I could say, kind, by the way, if you ever
see kind in TypeScript code, it's because
we don't wanna write the word type.
That's a special thing,
that's like a type alias.
Kind is a good alternative to use.
So, and this will be,
A key of EntityMap, great.
So now this book thing is gonna be happy.
Now I actually want this to be generic,
right?
So we'll say k for kind.
And the reason is, I need to create
a relationship between things.
So if you remember back to
the TypeScript fundamentals,
when we talked about generics and
type params.
The whole point of this
is we're defining some
parameter that describes
a linkage between things.
So, in the case of get,
the relationship is I'm asking for
a book, and let's say we provide an ID.
And I'm gonna return a book, or maybe
like a promise that resolves to a book.
Let's pretend this is all synchronous for
now,
you can make it async by just
making all these promises instead.
But we're gonna return EntityMap[k],
this is an indexed access type here,
right?
We're saying, project the word
book through this EntityMap.
All right, here's book,
grab the value, bring it back.
And so over here, look at our return type,
when we use this string book here,
we get a book back.
Watch this, when we use movie,
check that out,
we're getting a movie back.
So depending on that
word that we're using,
we get the right type of
entity returned to us.
Now, we can do the same thing with
the collection, it should be very similar.
But let's say we don't need an ID here,
since we're getting them all, and
I'm just gonna put square
brackets after this.
And let's see what's happening here,
getAll('book'), we get an array of books.
So this is a great use of generics,
a great use of an index access type.
Create, so here, we want to
take an object to create, right?
And this is gonna be an EntityMap[k],
and this will be a void.
So here, if we were to say,
I'm creating a book,
and in here we get author,
right, get some validation.
If we gonna change this word to movie or
to song, song wants artist,
From Mark G's new album, right?
So, we get that nice linkage
between the first argument,
which is a literal type, it's a statement
of which record we're operating on,
and that gives us some really great
control over the second argument.
What about update?
So we can actually just borrow this from
the create, and we will say to update,
or actually we need an ID here, cuz
we're referring to an individual record.
So we need an ID because we're
referring to an individual record, and
the only thing we're gonna
change is we'll say partial.
So if you remember what partial is,
if we look at the type,
it's gonna loop over all of
the properties in whatever it's given and
make the value type optional.
So this means that if we had,
let's say, books have a title,
In addition to an author, so
this would let us say I'm gonna
update this book, and
I could just do the author, or actually,
I could do nothing at all,
this is sort of a no update.
But we get some validation,
but we may just have a piece,
like I'm just editing one field, right?
Whereas up here, if we said book, We need
an author, And a title.
Something like that.
Now we could, implementing these,
I would leave as an exercise to you.
That's not about the types,
that's about the JavaScript,
the actual code that you would run.
So, what we've used here are,
within partial, right,
we've used a map to type,
we've used this little modifier here,
we've used an indexed access type.
This mapping here is really nice and
important, and
everything's sort of flowing through that.
So this interface ends up being really
important because everything sort of
threads through it.
Now, what if we had each of these
types of records in its own file?
I mean, this is common, right?
Where if we have models for
data, we have a JavaScript
module that is dedicated for
book and for movie.
Well, watch this.
And then delete this, everything's
gonna start failing at the bottom,
cuz it's an empty interface, right?
So key of that empty interface, there's
like, nothing's gonna make it happy,
and in fact,
the key of an empty interface is never.
So a no string will make it happy, but
we'll get back there, no cause for alarm.
So we would still need EntityMap to exist.
I'm just gonna create a line here
representing different modules, and
you'll have to take my word for it that
this will work across multiple files.
So let's imagine that these are all
different files, we could do this.
We're gonna take advantage of
the fact that interfaces are open.
I see some head nods,
people know where I'm going with this.
So, if you maybe have
some kind of library or
framework that you're using
that has like code generation,
where it builds starting point files for
you, all you need is to have this.
This is part of your code gen,
this little thing.
So each record type we have here,
a movie, a song, a book,
they're all sorta adding
themselves to this EntityMap.
It's almost like they're registering
themselves with this central thing.
And it turns out everything
ends up being added here and
our code starts working again.
I need a title here, A History of
TypeScript, I can't help myself.
So, basically, we get the same
autocomplete that we had before.
If it works.
There we go, book, movie, and song, right?
So, this has the same effect as if we
defined that one interface upfront.
So you can have your code split up
across many, many different modules.
You get to group each
concern according to movie,
and song, and book, right?
According to what you're modeling,
instead of saying, all right,
here's where we maintain all the types,
and here's where we maintain
the actual code that runs.
That to me is the wrong splitting point, I
like being able to go to this one file and
it's all here,
everything having to do with this is here.
And this shows us that
this EntityMap thing and
interfaces in general are kind of
this cross cutting thing that,
You can use to sort of make
horizontal things across your app.
Meaning, we can refer to this now and
it relates to all of the different
types of records we could work with,
not just one thing in one module.
Now typically, these will be in separate
files, we can kinda simulate that.
And we're gonna do this with what's
called a module declaration.
This is as if, so
make TypeScript think that this
lives in a library called fem-data.
All right,
this is actually gonna still work,
because we've got these
EntityMap things here.
Sorry, we've got the individual
interface declarations for
each record, but let's copy this over.
Let's see how this works.
Cool, now EntityMap is not gonna be
accessible here, maybe we can do this.
[SOUND] Import,
this may be beyond what the,
May be beyond what
the playground can handle.
Actually, we may be getting the right
auto complete behavior here,
let's check one more time.
Nope, it's all disappeared.
So, beyond the bounds of what can be done
in the playground, but this is exactly
what you would want if you were breaking
things up across many JavaScript modules.
So you could say,
you would define this here where this
interface actually exists, some ts file.
And then here you could say
location/of/entity-map, right?
Just like it's a local file of some sort.
And that'll make sure that you're
modifying the EntityMap that's in that
other file.
You're augmenting that interface
rather than an EntityMap
that's in this one module,
if that makes sense.
It's a really powerful
pattern that scales nicely,
because you can imagine as you add and
remove different modules and
things, this list of things you could
retrieve from the database grows.
You don't want one central collision
point where they're just tons of git
conflicts there all the time.
This makes it so
everything sort of has its own place
with one central location of registry.